Essential Points for the Investigation of Philosophical Tenets Homage to the Omniscient One! The philosophical tenets can be classified as twofold: those of other traditions and those of our own. The Tenets of Other Traditions Generally speaking, there are countless assertions made by those holding distorted views. However, the most significant one was made by followers of the doctrine of supreme Brahman, who assert the existence of a self that is permanent, pervasive, without body, and singular. This view is untenable. Is this self identical with the skandhas or substantially different from them? It would be illogical to assert the former, since the self is seen as permanent, while the skandhas are impermanent. The latter is also unacceptable since there would need to be some substantial entity called "self" other than the skandhas, which could be pointed to after the five skandhas have been removed. If one argues that such a self exists but is not apparent to anyone, one must also accept the existence of the horn of a rabbit and the child of a barren woman. Thus, since the self is not seen to be either the skandhas or something substantially different, and since it is not reasonable to maintain a third alternative-stating that the self is neither the skandhas nor something different-it is established that there is no such self. One might further inquire, are the self and the skandhas the "support" and the "supported"? Such a phenomenon is not observed. Does the self pervade the skandhas? That would be a contradiction in substance, since the self is one and the skandhas are manifold. The self also does not possess the skandhas, since no connection between the two has been established. The self is not singular since the entities it is believed to pervade are separate. If the self is one, it follows that by binding one individual, all others are bound as well. The self is not autonomous since happiness and suffering are experienced regardless of one's wishes. It is also not feasible to assert that the self is without body since the idea of the self as something separate from the body has already been refuted. If one asserts that the body is the self, the premise of it being without body is undermined. Lastly, a third alternative is not established. For these reasons, it follows that this designation of a "self" or "I" is similar to identifying a rope as a snake. The Tenets of Our Own Tradition The Śrāvaka Tenets According to the śrāvaka tenets, outer phenomena are composed of subtle particles either separated by space, not separated by space, or without space between them yet not joined. These views are illogical. According to them, apprehending a rope as a snake is a delusion, but asserting it to be a rope is a mistake as well. Even thinking a rope is in fact not a rope but two twisted strings or a bundle of fibers, one is mistaken. Even fibers do not exist; they are collections of subtle particles. Now, do these subtle particles exist? They do not, because for a particle to be truly existent implies that it has no directional parts. When the directional parts of a particle are separated, however, no such particle without directional parts can be found. One may then argue that the directional parts are inseparable from the particle. However, when one central particle is surrounded by six other particles, is the part connected to the particle located to its west also connected to the particles located to its east, or not? If it is connected, the particle in the center of the six other particles is indeed a single partless entity. This would imply, however, that all things agglomerated by particles collapse into one subtle particle. If it is not connected to both sides, the premise of the particle being partless is undermined. Thus, since the existence of a single particle has not been established, nor can the existence of many. Without particles, notions of them being with or without space between them, or them touching yet not being conjoined, are nothing but mental superimpositions. Some maintain that entities exist as wholes possessed of parts, like a rosary and its constituent threads, for instance. This is untenable. Are the parts and the whole one or separate entities? To maintain that they are one is untenable. If they were, anything that has an outer red layer, for instance, would have to be entirely red, both inside and outside. Also, they cannot be different entities since no whole can be observed separate from its parts. Who has ever seen a whole rosary separate from its twisted strings and strands of fiber? The Cittamātra Tenets According to followers of the Cittamātra tenets, the self, particles, and so forth are nonexistent. Mind and awakened awareness, however, are believed to have momentary existence arising in a continuum. This is untenable because momentary existence cannot be established: since the past moment has ceased and the future moment has not yet come to be, both are nonexistent; and without past and future, how could there be a present moment that arises as a result of these? Regarding the mind, do cause and result arise at separate times or simultaneously? Supposing they arise at separate times, is there a gap between the ending of the cause and the arising of the result? Asserting a gap is untenable because it could only arise from a past moment, which is a nonentity as it has already ceased. Asserting no gap is also illogical because all of time would collapse into a single moment; it would follow that an entire eon would be equal to a single moment, and even one moment would have further subdivisions. To maintain that cause and result arise simultaneously is also untenable. What effect would the cause have on the result? Things that exist simultaneously, such as the right and left horns of a cow, cannot be differentiated in terms of cause and result. Furthermore, if the resultant mind arises from an existent cause, a pot would give rise to another pot. If one maintains that it arises from a nonexistent cause, it absurdly follows that rabbits could have horns. If one asserts that it arises without cause, it absurdly follows that mind can arise on the basis of mere matter. Does one cause give rise to one result? No, because it can be observed that single results arise in dependence on many causes and conditions, such as a clay pot. Does one cause give rise to many results? In that case, cause and result would be at odds. From the perspective of the cause, there would be too many results, and from the perspective of the result, there would be too few causes. Do many causes give rise to a single result? The fault this would entail is the exact opposite of the previous one. Do many causes give rise to many results? If a single cause cannot generate a single result, many causes cannot generate many results since "many" is merely a collection of "single" entities. Therefore, the mind asserted by the followers of the Cittamātra tenets does not arise from any cause whatsoever, and it does not arise in any way. If there is still conviction in its existence, one may ask, what is the mind's essential nature? Is it singular or multiple? If the former, it would be impossible to perceive multiplicities. If the latter, it must either consist of subtle material particles or many moments of mind. Which one is it? The refutation of these points has already been taught. According to the proponents of false images, mere mind devoid of images is distinguished from material objects due to its knowing quality. It cannot be investigated or expressed. However, this is not tenable. If something has form, it should be visible, and how could something without form be observed? Likewise, we must investigate the existence of a continuously arising awakened awareness. According to the proponents of real images, awakened awareness endowed with pure focal objects exists. This is untenable since the elimination of all faults and the arising of awakened awareness in terms of a sign that can be apprehended are mutually exclusive. The proponents of false images argue as follows: "Since a future moment cannot be established when neither past nor present exists, then, if there were no mind essence-the basis that is transformed-how can there be awakened awareness, the transformed basis? Moreover, if there is no such awakened awareness, how could the benefit of beings come about?" Just like a butter lamp that has burnt out, the activities of mind and mental factors have ended; but nothing is interrupted, as nothing has ever existed. The benefit of others is accomplished through the power of aspirations alone. By Mañjughoṣa. 
